The Celts (/ˈkɛlts/, occasionally /ˈsɛlts/, see pronunciation of Celtic) were people in Iron Age and Medieval
Europe who spoke Celtic languages and had cultural similarites, although the relationship between ethnic,
linguistic and cultural factors in the Celtic world remains uncertain and controversial. The exact geographic
spread of the ancient Celts is also disputed; in particular, the ways in which the Iron Age inhabitants of
Great Britain and Ireland should be regarded as Celts has become a subject of controversy.

The history of pre-Celtic Europe remains very uncertain. According to one theory, the common root of the
Celtic languages, a language known as Proto-Celtic, arose in the Late Bronze Age Urnfield culture of Central
Europe, which flourished from around 1200 BC. In addition, according to a theory proposed in the 19th century,
the first people to adopt cultural characteristics regarded as Celtic were the people of the Iron Age
Hallstatt culture in central Europe (c. 800–450 BC), named for the rich grave finds in Hallstatt, Austria. Thus
this area is sometimes called the 'Celtic homeland'. By or during the later La Tène period (c. 450 BC up to
the Roman conquest), this Celtic culture was supposed to have expanded by diffusion or migration to the
British Isles (Insular Celts), France and The Low Countries (Gauls), Bohemia, Poland and much of Central
Europe, the Iberian Peninsula (Celtiberians, Celtici, Lusitanians and Gallaeci) and northern Italy
(Golaseccans and Cisalpine Gauls) and, following the Gallic invasion of the Balkans in 279 BC, as far east as
central Anatolia (Galatians).

The earliest undisputed direct examples of a Celtic language are the Lepontic inscriptions, beginning in the
6th century BC. Continental Celtic languages are attested almost exclusively through inscriptions and
place-names. Insular Celtic is attested beginning around the 4th century AD through Ogham inscriptions,
although it was clearly being spoken much earlier. Celtic literary tradition begins with Old Irish texts
around the 8th century. Coherent texts of Early Irish literature, such as the Táin Bó Cúailnge (The Cattle
Raid of Cooley), survive in 12th-century recensions.

By the mid 1st millennium AD, with the expansion of the Roman Empire and the Great Migrations (Migration
Period) of Germanic peoples, Celtic culture and Insular Celtic had become restricted to Ireland, the western
and northern parts of Great Britain (Wales, Scotland, and Cornwall), the Isle of Man, and Brittany. Between
the 5th and 8th centuries, the Celtic-speaking communities in these Atlantic regions emerged as a reasonably
cohesive cultural entity. They had a common linguistic, religious, and artistic heritage that distinguished
them from the culture of the surrounding polities. By the 6th century, however, the Continental Celtic
languages were no longer in wide use.

Insular Celtic culture diversified into that of the Gaels (Irish, Scottish and Manx) and the Brythonic Celts
(Welsh, Cornish, and Bretons) of the medieval and modern periods. A modern "Celtic identity" was constructed
as part of the Romanticist Celtic Revival in Great Britain, Ireland, and other European territories, such as
Portugal and Spanish Galicia. Today, Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Welsh, and Breton are still spoken in parts of
their historical territories, and Cornish and Manx are undergoing a revival.